Guide GCP Cloud Trace with OpenTelemetry (#964)
micronaut-projects/micronaut-guides: guides/micronaut-cloud-trace-base/create-app.adoc

common:completesolution.adoc[]

common:create-app-features.adoc[]

=== OpenTelemetry

The Micronaut framework uses https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] to generate and export tracing data.

> OpenTelemetry provides two annotations one to create a span and another to include additional information to the span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry provides two annotations: one to create a span and another to include additional information to the span.
```

> @WithSpan:: Used on methods to creates a new span using a given name or defaults to the method name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@WithSpan:: Used on methods to create a new span; defaults to the method name, but a unique name may be assigned instead.
```

> @SpanAttribute:: Used on method parameter to include the value to the span with a given name or defaults to the parameter name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@SpanAttribute:: Used on method parameters to assign a value to a span; defaults to the parameter name, but a unique name may be assigned instead.
```

> The `@WithSpan` and `@SpanAttribute` can be used on non-private methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@WithSpan` and `@SpanAttribute` can be used only on non-private methods.
```

> If the annotations are not enough, or you want to add tracing to a private method, Micronaut’s tracing integration registers a `io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer` bean which exposes the OpenTelemetry API and can be dependency-injected as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If these annotations are not enough, or if you want to add tracing to a private method, the Micronaut framework’s tracing integration registers a `io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer` bean, which exposes the OpenTelemetry API and can be dependency-injected as needed.
```

[NOTE]
====

> The `io.micronaut.tracing.annotation` are available if you prefer or have an existing Micronaut Application already using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `io.micronaut.tracing.annotation`s are available if you prefer to use them or if you are working on an existing Micronaut application that already uses them.
```

> - `@NewSpan` : Identical to `@WithSpan`, it is used on methods to creates a new span using a given name or defaults to the method name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `@NewSpan` : Identical to `@WithSpan`, it is used on methods to create a new span; defaults to the method name, but a unique name may be assigned instead.
```

> - `@ContinueSpan` : Used on methods to continue the existing span. Primarily used in conjunction with `@SpanTag`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `@ContinueSpan` : Used on methods to continue an existing span; primarily used in conjunction with `@SpanTag`.
```

> - `@SpanTag` : Similar to `@SpanAttribute`, it is used on method parameter to include the value to the span with a given name or defaults to the parameter name. To use the `@SpanTag` on a method argument, the method must be annotated with either `@NewSpan` or `@ContinueSpan`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `@SpanTag` : Similar to `@SpanAttribute`, it is used on method parameters to assign a value to a span; defaults to the parameter name, but a unique name may be assigned instead. To use the `@SpanTag` on a method argument, the method must be annotated with either `@NewSpan` or `@ContinueSpan`.
```

====

=== Inventory Service

source:InventoryService[]
<1> Inject Tracing bean into class
<2> Creates a new span called "stock-counts"
<3> Adds a label, or tag, called "inventory.item" that will contain the value contained in `item`
<4> Same as `@SpanAttribute("inventory.store-name")`
<5> Same as `@WithSpan("warehouse-order")` with `@SpanAttributes` for item and count

=== Store Controller

> This class demonstrates using the `io.micronaut.tracing.annotation` instead of the OpenTelemetry annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This class demonstrates use of the `io.micronaut.tracing.annotation` instead of the OpenTelemetry annotations.
```

[NOTE]
====

> If you have the following dependency declared, all HTTP Server methods (those annotated with `@Get`, `@Post` and etc.) will create spans automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have the following dependency declared, all HTTP Server methods (those annotated with `@Get`, `@Post`, etc.) will create spans automatically.
```

dependency:micronaut-tracing-opentelemetry-http[groupId=io.micronaut.tracing]
====

source:StoreController[]
<1> Equivalent to `@WithSpan("store.order")`
<2> Same as `@SpanAttribute("order.item")`and `@SpanAttribute`
<3> Span created automatically if `micronaut-tracing-opentelemetry-http` is declared
<4> Required for `@SpanTag`
<5> Tag is only added to the span if `micronaut-tracing-opentelemetry-http` is declared; otherwise ignored

=== Warehouse Client

You can also mix OpenTelemetry and Micronaut Tracing annotations in the same class.

[NOTE]
====

> If you have the following dependency declared, all HTTP Client methods (those annotated with `@Get`, `@Post` and etc.) will create spans automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have the following dependency declared, all HTTP Client methods (those annotated with `@Get`, `@Post`, etc.) will create spans automatically.
```

dependency:micronaut-tracing-opentelemetry-http[groupId=io.micronaut.tracing]
====

source:WarehouseClient[]

> <1> Some external service without Tracing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Some external service without tracing
```

@SpanAttribute:: Used on method parameter to include the value to the span with a given name or defaults to the parameter name.

The `@WithSpan` and `@SpanAttribute` can be used on non-private methods.

If the annotations are not enough, or you want to add tracing to a private method, Micronaut’s tracing integration registers a `io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer` bean which exposes the OpenTelemetry API and can be dependency-injected as needed.

[NOTE]
====
The `io.micronaut.tracing.annotation` are available if you prefer or have an existing Micronaut Application already using them.

- `@NewSpan` : Identical to `@WithSpan`, it is used on methods to creates a new span using a given name or defaults to the method name.
- `@ContinueSpan` : Used on methods to continue the existing span. Primarily used in conjunction with `@SpanTag`.
- `@SpanTag` : Similar to `@SpanAttribute`, it is used on method parameter to include the value to the span with a given name or defaults to the parameter name. To use the `@SpanTag` on a method argument, the method must be annotated with either `@NewSpan` or `@ContinueSpan`.
====

==== OpenTelemetry Trace Exporter

> If you did not use Micronaut CLI or Launch to create your application, add the OpenTelemetry exporter to your `application.yml`.

Reviewer 2: This sentence makes sense if we also add list of dependencies that end user has to add.

Author: Removed that section. Since OCI requires extra otel configurations.

common:completesolution.adoc[]

== Writing the Application

The Micronaut framework uses https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] to generate and export tracing data.

OpenTelemetry provides two annotations one to create a span and another to include additional information to the span.

@WithSpan:: Used on methods to creates a new span using a given name or defaults to the method name.

@SpanAttribute:: Used on method parameter to include the value to the span with a given name or defaults to the parameter name.

The `@WithSpan` and `@SpanAttribute` can be used on non-private methods.

If the annotations are not enough, or you want to add tracing to a private method, Micronaut’s tracing integration registers a `io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer` bean which exposes the OpenTelemetry API and can be dependency-injected as needed.

[NOTE]
====
The `io.micronaut.tracing.annotation` are available if you prefer or have an existing Micronaut Application using them.

- `@NewSpan` : Maps to `@WithSpan`
- `@SpanTag` : Identical to `@SpanAttribute`

> - `@ContinueSpan` : this annotation is ignored

Reviewer 2: This statement isn't true.
Consider next example:
```
@Controller("/trace")
public class TracingController {

    @Get("/test")
    @ContinueSpan
    String test(@SpanTag("appends-to-http-span") @Header("X-TrackingId") String tracingId) {
        return tracingId;
    }

    @Get("/test2")
    String test2(@SpanTag("doesnt-appends-to-http-span") @Header("X-TrackingId") String tracingId) {
        return tracingId;
    }

}
```

The content of tracingId will appear in `appends-to-http-span` attribute in the `/test` endpoint.
The content of tracingId and `doesnt-appends-to-http-span` attribute won't appear in `/test2` endpoint.

To attach `@SpanTag` and `@SpanAttribute` values to span you have to have either `@WithSpan\@Newspan` annotation or `@ContinueSpan` annotation on the class method. Difference is that `@NewSpan` creates new span with method and class name and puts annotated attributes in span and  the `@ContinueSpan` picks the current span which will be in the most of cases either HTTP span like in this example or one that was created  with `@WithSpan\@Newspan` annotation and it will insert the annotated attributes inside it.
